---
layout: post
title: LibBi 1.1.0 Released
date: 2014-05-19 10:30:00 +08:00
---

LibBi version 1.1.0 is [now
available](https://github.com/lawmurray/LibBi/archive/1.1.0.tar.gz). Major new
features include syntax for referencing subranges of vectors and matrices in
model files, and the addition of the *bridge particle filter* described in
this new paper:

Del Moral, P. & Murray, L. M. [Sequential Monte Carlo with Highly Informative
Observations](http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.4081), 2014.


Changes
-------

New features:

* Added bridge particle filter.
* Added built-in variables `t_now`, `t_last_input` and `t_next_obs`.
* Added `transpose` and `cholesky` actions.
* Added `log` argument to `pdf` action.
* Added matrix-matrix multiply.
* Added range syntax, e.g. `x[0:4]`.
* Added checks for `*.sh`, `data/*.nc` and `oct/*.m` files to
  `libbi package --validate` checks.

Changes:

* Removed ill-defined `uninformative` action.
* Action syntax made stricter: an action that returns a scalar cannot be
  applied to a vector on the left.

Performance:

* Minor performance improvements in GPU random number generation and
  resampling.
* Minor I/O performance improvements.

Fixes:

* Restored NetCDF 4.1 support.
* Fixed initialisation of parameters from init file when
  `--with-transform-initial-to-param` used.
* Fixed `C_` and `U2_` variables in Kalman filter output files.
* Fixed reporting of log-likelihood in PMCMC output when particle filter
  degenerates.
* Fixed build error when model name does not begin with an uppercase letter.
* Fixed runtime error when empty `--output-file` given.
* Fixed race condition in locking the build directory under some
  circumstances.
* Fixed unnecessary recompiles triggered by new hash implementation in newer
  versions of Perl.
