---
layout: post
title: LibBi 1.2.0 released, new stochastic volatility example
author: Lawrence Murray
---

LibBi version 1.2.0 is [now
available](https://github.com/lawmurray/LibBi/archive/1.2.0.tar.gz): easier to install, Windows compatible for the first time, and with AVX support for faster performance on recent CPUs.

A new package demonstrating a simple stochastic volatility model is [also available](http://www.libbi.org/packages/StochasticVolatility.html).


Changes
-------

New features:

* Streamlined installation instructions: Perl module dependencies are now
  installed automatically, `make test` checks for these dependencies, and
  MAGMA is optional.
* CPU builds now work on Windows under Cygwin.
* CUDA builds now work on Mac OS X.
* AVX support added (use `--enable-avx`).
* SMC$^2$ now works with a Kalman filter over the state, not just a particle
  filter, and has been renamed marginal SIR to reflect this.
* Output at observation times can now be disabled (use
  `--without-output-at-obs`).
* Non-const scalar expressions are now allowed as indexes on the left side of
  actions.

Changes:

* Distribution now contains a compiled version of the manual.
* Major refactoring of methods code to reduce replication.

Performance:

* Improved performance under `--enable-sse`.

Fixes:

* Fixed the first observation in a time series being zero when `--start-time`
  did not match the earliest time in `--obs-file`.
* Fixed CUDA kernel execution configurations for large numbers of variables.
* Fixed matrix range being ignored on the right side of actions.

